README_JHBUILD_GTK_OSX.md, before:

# Gtk-OSX #

This project along with
[gtk-mac-bundler](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk-mac-bundler) and
[gtk-mac-integration](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk-mac-integration)
aims to simplify building MacOS application bundles for Gtk+-based
applications. Gtk-OSX provides modulesets, patches, and jhbuild
enhancements for building Gtk+ applications on your Mac. Unlike
"package manager" style systems like MacPorts or Homebrew, Gtk-OSX
installs products into user-configurable "silo" subdirectories that
stand on their own, making it easy to have multiple independent
installations of the Gtk+ stack and other dependencies to accommodate
the requirements of different applications. The build environment
created by Gtk-OSX is suitable for development of Gnome libraries and
Gtk+-based applications on MacOS; indeed the author has been using it
for just that purpose for almost 10 years.

## Modulesets ##

There is 1 moduleset. You can select the one which most suits you by
adding the line
      moduleset="https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk-osx/raw/master/modulesets-stable/gtk-osx.modules"

to your ~/.jhbuildrc-custom, replacing "modulesets-stable" (the default) with

 * modulesets-stable: The default, all tarball-based released sources.

## Customization ##

Jhbuild has a hook that opens a special file ~/.jhbuildrc (the
name and path can be overridden with the ```-f``` command-line
parameter). Gtk-OSX provides a file intended to be installed as
~/.jhbuildrc that configures the build parameters according to
the version of MacOS that you're running or that you intend to target,
i.e. MACOS_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET. That file, jhbuildrc-gtk-osx, includes
it's own hook to load a file named ~/.jhbuildrc-custom (not
overrideable, sorry). This second rc file is for local customization,
including the usual things contemplated by the jhbuild developers for
the [configuration
file](https://developer.gnome.org/jhbuild/unstable/config-reference.html.en).
While Gtk-OSX provides a sample file with extensive comments
explaining possible options, users should in no way feel constrained
by those comments. The file is Python and is loaded and executed just
as is the rest of jhbuild so there are huge opportunities for further
customization.

[Jhbuild documentation](https://gnome.pages.gitlab.gnome.org/jhbuild/)

## Python ##

Gimp, for build purposes, is requiring Python3.9.

Apple provided Python3 in Mac OS X 10.6 and dropped it in 10.7, so we
need to arrange for Python 3 to be available for jhbuild to build
meson files with as well as meson itself. Setup takes care of that
at installation. It relies on two Python standard packages,
[Pipenv](https://docs.pipenv.org/) and
[pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv). In combination they create a
Python3 [virtual
environment](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html) and
populate it with to required dependencies, the afore-mentioned meson
and [six](https://pypi.org/project/six/), a python 2/3 compatibility
library used by gtk-doc.

### Python Configuration ###

gtk-osx-setup.sh uses several environment variables to control where it
puts things. Override the defaults by setting the corresponding
variable in the environment before running gtk-osx-setup.sh.

* DEVROOT         default: $HOME                Base directory
* DEVPREFIX       default: $DEVROOT/.new_local  Prefix for jhbuild tools
* PYTHONUSERBASE  default: $DEVROOT/.new_local  Location where PIP installs packages when --user is given as an option; new-setup.sh uses --user when invoking pip.
* DEV_SRC_ROOT    default: $DEVROOT/Source      Location of pyenv and jhbuild sources
* PYENV_ROOT      default: $DEV_SRC_ROOT/pyenv  Prefix for pyenv's sources and virtual environments.
* PIP_CONFIG_DIR  default: $HOME/.config/pip    Pip's configuration, see the PIP documentation.

PYTHONUSERBASE, PYENV_ROOT, and PIP_CONFIG_DIR are actually specified
by PIP and PYENV. Pipenv and pyenv have other control environment
variables, consult their documentation for more information.

gtk-osx-setup.sh will create several shell-script and configuration files,
but it will not overwrite any that already exist so it's safe to
customize your setup after running it. The files are:

* $DEVPREFIX/etc/Pipfile             Configures the python version and installed packages.
* $DEVPREFIX/etc/pipenv-env          Environment variables for pipenv-controlled virtual environment.
* $DEVPREFIX/bin/jhbuild             Shell script to run jhbuild inside a pipenv-controlled virtual environment using the above Pipfile and pipenv environment file.
* $DEVPREFIX/libexec/run_jhbuild.py  Python file replacing the jhbuild executable provided by jhbuild itself. Called from the jhbuild shell script.

gtk-osx-setup.sh will also copy /usr/bin/bash to $DEVPREFIX/bin and jhbuildrc-gtk-osx will set $SHELL to that path to work around SIP.

The pipenv control file sets Python3.9 as its required version, and gtk-osx-setup.sh will create a pyenv virtual environment for that. If you don't already have Python3.9 in your $PATH it will offer to install the latest Python3.9 release for you.

*Note*: This may no longer be valid or needed:

Before you build there's one manual step needed: Python3 insists on
setting `LINKFORSHARED: -Wl,stack_size,1000000 -framework
CoreFoundation` even though stack_size is allowed only when compiling
executables. It's in
`$PYENV_ROOT/versions/3.6.x/lib/python3.6/_sysconfigdata_m-darwin.py`. Open
that file with your programming editor and find and change it to
`LINKFORSHARED: -framework CoreFoundation`.

## Bootstrapping ##

Unlike previous versions of gtk-osx-build-setup.sh, gtk-osx-setup.sh
does *not* copy the Gtk-OSX boostrap moduleset over the jhbuild one.
Instead, jhbuildrc provides a new command

```
jhbuild bootstrap-gtk-osx
```

This command will by default load the bootstrap.modules from gtk-osx's
Gitlab repository. If ```use_local_modules``` is true (default is
false, override it in jhbuildrc-custom) and a file named
bootstrap.modules exists in the same directory as the moduleset you've
told jhbuild to use (set with ```moduleset = ``` in jhbuildrc-custom
or the ```-m``` option to jhbuild) it will build that. This allows you
to have a custom bootstrap.modules for your project.

If you set ```use_local_modules``` to true and set ```modulesets_dir =```
to a valid path containing a file named bootstrap.modules then
bootstrap-gtk-osx will build that moduleset instead.

Note that in order to actually work the bootstrap.modules moduleset
file must contain a meta-module named ```meta-bootstrap``` that
depends on all of the modules that you want to build.


## Build Problems ##

The build is quite flaky and at least fiddly. Making the build work
locally can be a battle. For now, with the exception of webkit,
the build appears to be quite stable.

## Speeding up build loops ##

One of the problems of JHBuild is that it takes over everything, and
you have to let it.

One solution around this is to pop into a local build shell and build
from there. This can massively speed up the compile loop.

Here are some sample commands that you could put in your build
script to help pop into the shell:

```
source ~/.profile && jhbuild shell
```

Once you've entered the shell:

```
cd .cache/jhbuild/build/gimp
```

For autotools `head config.log` will tell you what the configure was (don't know meson version)

### examples ###

#### autotools ####

```
~/gtk/source/gimp/configure --prefix ~/gtk/inst --without-x --with-build-id=org.IMP_official --with-revision=0"
make && make install"
make uninstall"
```

I've generally been able to just run `make && make install`

#### meson ####

But to be honest, `ninja install` seems to make sure everything happens that
needs to. And if meson needs to be fixed, it might be as simple as
`meson --reconfigure`

Other possible commands:

```
meson --prefix ~/gtk/inst --libdir lib -Dopenssl=enabled --wrap-mode=nofallback source/glib-networking-2.68.0
ninja && ninja install
ninja uninstall
```

#### Note ####

If you've compiled with `autotools`, first uninstall that before compiling with
`meson`.

## Notarization and security ##

These links have content around code signing and security entitlements.
When these weren't set correctly, the application, and specifically
Python plug-ins failed to load and basically hung. There were no error
messages, so it was difficult to figure out what was going wrong.

- [https://developer.apple.com/documentation/bundleresources/entitlements/com_apple_security_cs_allow-unsigned-executable-memory](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/bundleresources/entitlements/com_apple_security_cs_allow-unsigned-executable-memory)
- [https://developer.apple.com/documentation/apple-silicon/porting-just-in-time-compilers-to-apple-silicon](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/apple-silicon/porting-just-in-time-compilers-to-apple-silicon)
- [https://developer.apple.com/forums/thread/132908](https://developer.apple.com/forums/thread/132908)
- [https://developer.apple.com/forums/thread/130560](https://developer.apple.com/forums/thread/130560)

Commit message:

jhbuild: Update documentation
Clarified where jhbuildrc comes from and is stored.

jhbuildrc should potentially be moved to this repo rather than be installed
from https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk-osx.

README_JHBUILD_GTK_OSX.md, after:

# Gtk-OSX #

This project along with
[gtk-mac-bundler](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk-mac-bundler) and
[gtk-mac-integration](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk-mac-integration)
aims to simplify building MacOS application bundles for Gtk+-based
applications. Gtk-OSX provides modulesets, patches, and jhbuild
enhancements for building Gtk+ applications on your Mac. Unlike
"package manager" style systems like MacPorts or Homebrew, Gtk-OSX
installs products into user-configurable "silo" subdirectories that
stand on their own, making it easy to have multiple independent
installations of the Gtk+ stack and other dependencies to accommodate
the requirements of different applications. The build environment
created by Gtk-OSX is suitable for development of Gnome libraries and
Gtk+-based applications on MacOS; indeed the author has been using it
for just that purpose for almost 10 years.

## Modulesets ##

There is 1 moduleset. You can select the one which most suits you by
adding the line
      moduleset="https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk-osx/raw/master/modulesets-stable/gtk-osx.modules"

to your ~/.jhbuildrc-custom, replacing "modulesets-stable" (the default) with

 * modulesets-stable: The default, all tarball-based released sources.

## Customization ##

Jhbuild has a hook that opens a special file ~/.config/jhbuildrc (the
name and path can be overridden with the ```-f``` command-line
parameter). Gtk-OSX provides a file intended to be installed as
~/.config/jhbuildrc that configures the build parameters according to
the version of MacOS that you're running or that you intend to target,
i.e. MACOS_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET. NOTE: This file is downloaded from the
[gtk-osx](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk-osx) repo and installed
as a build step. That file, jhbuildrc-gtk-osx, includes it's own hook to
load a file named ~/.config/jhbuildrc-custom. This second rc file is for
local customization, including the usual things contemplated by the jhbuild
developers for the
[configuration file](https://developer.gnome.org/jhbuild/unstable/config-reference.html.en).
While Gtk-OSX provides a sample file with extensive comments
explaining possible options, users should in no way feel constrained
by those comments. The file is Python and is loaded and executed just
as is the rest of jhbuild so there are huge opportunities for further
customization.

[Jhbuild documentation](https://gnome.pages.gitlab.gnome.org/jhbuild/)

## Python ##

Gimp, for build purposes, is requiring Python3.9.

Apple provided Python3 in Mac OS X 10.6 and dropped it in 10.7, so we
need to arrange for Python 3 to be available for jhbuild to build
meson files with as well as meson itself. Setup takes care of that
at installation. It relies on two Python standard packages,
[Pipenv](https://docs.pipenv.org/) and
[pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv). In combination they create a
Python3 [virtual
environment](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html) and
populate it with to required dependencies, the afore-mentioned meson
and [six](https://pypi.org/project/six/), a python 2/3 compatibility
library used by gtk-doc.

### Python Configuration ###

gtk-osx-setup.sh uses several environment variables to control where it
puts things. Override the defaults by setting the corresponding
variable in the environment before running gtk-osx-setup.sh.

* DEVROOT         default: $HOME                Base directory
* DEVPREFIX       default: $DEVROOT/.new_local  Prefix for jhbuild tools
* PYTHONUSERBASE  default: $DEVROOT/.new_local  Location where PIP installs packages when --user is given as an option; new-setup.sh uses --user when invoking pip.
* DEV_SRC_ROOT    default: $DEVROOT/Source      Location of pyenv and jhbuild sources
* PYENV_ROOT      default: $DEV_SRC_ROOT/pyenv  Prefix for pyenv's sources and virtual environments.
* PIP_CONFIG_DIR  default: $HOME/.config/pip    Pip's configuration, see the PIP documentation.

PYTHONUSERBASE, PYENV_ROOT, and PIP_CONFIG_DIR are actually specified
by PIP and PYENV. Pipenv and pyenv have other control environment
variables, consult their documentation for more information.

gtk-osx-setup.sh will create several shell-script and configuration files,
but it will not overwrite any that already exist so it's safe to
customize your setup after running it. The files are:

* $DEVPREFIX/etc/Pipfile             Configures the python version and installed packages.
* $DEVPREFIX/etc/pipenv-env          Environment variables for pipenv-controlled virtual environment.
* $DEVPREFIX/bin/jhbuild             Shell script to run jhbuild inside a pipenv-controlled virtual environment using the above Pipfile and pipenv environment file.
* $DEVPREFIX/libexec/run_jhbuild.py  Python file replacing the jhbuild executable provided by jhbuild itself. Called from the jhbuild shell script.

gtk-osx-setup.sh will also copy /usr/bin/bash to $DEVPREFIX/bin and jhbuildrc-gtk-osx will set $SHELL to that path to work around SIP.

The pipenv control file sets Python3.9 as its required version, and gtk-osx-setup.sh will create a pyenv virtual environment for that. If you don't already have Python3.9 in your $PATH it will offer to install the latest Python3.9 release for you.

*Note*: This may no longer be valid or needed:

Before you build there's one manual step needed: Python3 insists on
setting `LINKFORSHARED: -Wl,stack_size,1000000 -framework
CoreFoundation` even though stack_size is allowed only when compiling
executables. It's in
`$PYENV_ROOT/versions/3.6.x/lib/python3.6/_sysconfigdata_m-darwin.py`. Open
that file with your programming editor and find and change it to
`LINKFORSHARED: -framework CoreFoundation`.

## Bootstrapping ##

Unlike previous versions of gtk-osx-build-setup.sh, gtk-osx-setup.sh
does *not* copy the Gtk-OSX boostrap moduleset over the jhbuild one.
Instead, jhbuildrc provides a new command

```
jhbuild bootstrap-gtk-osx
```

This command will by default load the bootstrap.modules from gtk-osx's
Gitlab repository. If ```use_local_modules``` is true (default is
false, override it in jhbuildrc-custom) and a file named
bootstrap.modules exists in the same directory as the moduleset you've
told jhbuild to use (set with ```moduleset = ``` in jhbuildrc-custom
or the ```-m``` option to jhbuild) it will build that. This allows you
to have a custom bootstrap.modules for your project.

If you set ```use_local_modules``` to true and set ```modulesets_dir =```
to a valid path containing a file named bootstrap.modules then
bootstrap-gtk-osx will build that moduleset instead.

Note that in order to actually work the bootstrap.modules moduleset
file must contain a meta-module named ```meta-bootstrap``` that
depends on all of the modules that you want to build.


## Build Problems ##

The build is quite flaky and at least fiddly. Making the build work
locally can be a battle. For now, with the exception of webkit,
the build appears to be quite stable.

## Speeding up build loops ##

One of the problems of JHBuild is that it takes over everything, and
you have to let it.

One solution around this is to pop into a local build shell and build
from there. This can massively speed up the compile loop.

Here are some sample commands that you could put in your build
script to help pop into the shell:

```
source ~/.profile && jhbuild shell
```

Once you've entered the shell:

```
cd .cache/jhbuild/build/gimp
```

For autotools `head config.log` will tell you what the configure was (don't know meson version)

### examples ###

#### autotools ####

```
~/gtk/source/gimp/configure --prefix ~/gtk/inst --without-x --with-build-id=org.IMP_official --with-revision=0"
make && make install"
make uninstall"
```

I've generally been able to just run `make && make install`

#### meson ####

But to be honest, `ninja install` seems to make sure everything happens that
needs to. And if meson needs to be fixed, it might be as simple as
`meson --reconfigure`

Other possible commands:

```
meson --prefix ~/gtk/inst --libdir lib -Dopenssl=enabled --wrap-mode=nofallback source/glib-networking-2.68.0
ninja && ninja install
ninja uninstall
```

#### Note ####

If you've compiled with `autotools`, first uninstall that before compiling with
`meson`.

## Notarization and security ##

These links have content around code signing and security entitlements.
When these weren't set correctly, the application, and specifically
Python plug-ins failed to load and basically hung. There were no error
messages, so it was difficult to figure out what was going wrong.

- [https://developer.apple.com/documentation/bundleresources/entitlements/com_apple_security_cs_allow-unsigned-executable-memory](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/bundleresources/entitlements/com_apple_security_cs_allow-unsigned-executable-memory)
- [https://developer.apple.com/documentation/apple-silicon/porting-just-in-time-compilers-to-apple-silicon](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/apple-silicon/porting-just-in-time-compilers-to-apple-silicon)
- [https://developer.apple.com/forums/thread/132908](https://developer.apple.com/forums/thread/132908)
- [https://developer.apple.com/forums/thread/130560](https://developer.apple.com/forums/thread/130560)
